Update README and docs to be more clear and intuitive to new users (#949)
semgrep/semgrep: README.md

|:-----------|:---------------|:----------------------------|:----------------|:----------------------------------|:---------|:---------------|:----------------------|
| ✅          | ✅              | ✅                           | ✅               | ✅                                 | 🚧 |  Coming...      | Coming...             |

... and many more coming.

### Pattern Syntax Teaser

| **Python** | **Javascript** | **Go &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;** | **Java &nbsp;** | **C &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;** | **Typescript** | **PHP &nbsp; &nbsp;** |
|:-----------|:---------------|:----------------------------|:----------------|:----------------------------------|:---------------|:----------------------|
| ✅          | ✅              | ✅                           | ✅               | ✅                                 | Coming...      | Coming...             |
One of the most unique and useful things about Semgrep is how easy it is to write and iterate on queries. 

Example patterns:
The goal is to make it as *easy as possible* to go from an idea in your head to finding the code patterns you intend to.

> | **Pattern**                                                        | **Matches**                                                |

Reviewer: @clintgibler could you comment on why you removed this? this is actually the only place we have "pattern X matches code Y" and I would miss it if it was gone -- it's a nice easy way to grok the syntax deductively.

Author: @ievans Agreed, I like having a brief table of "pattern X matches Y code." 

To me, maybe it was some sort of combination of the patterns being links, the denseness of the table, maybe the patterns themselves - it felt a bit cluttered and hard to read / unintuitive. I felt like I had to focus to understand what each row was trying to convey, and that it wasn't obvious.

I'm happy to put this back as is, but at some point I'd like to either change the formatting, the code snippets, or somehow make the examples pop more / be clearer.

Reviewer 2: From a user:

> `$X == $X` is not narratively very poignant to me. It makes it looks like it’s just for code patterns, not variant analysis

Author: @dlukeomalley I vote for creating a separate issue to track updating examples in the table if that's something we want to do later.

exec (
    bar
)
~~~

Importantly, Semgrep would *not* match the following:

~~~python
# grep would match this, but semgrep ignores it because 
# it doesn't have the right function name
other_exec(bar)

# semgrep ignores commented out lines
# exec(foo)

# and hard-coded strings
print("exec(bar)")
~~~

Semgrep can even do fancy things like matching aliased imports:

~~~python
# Semgrep knows that safe_function refers to exec so it
# will still match!
#   Oof, try finding this with grep
import exec as safe_function
safe_function(tricksy)
~~~

Play with this example in your browser here: https://semgrep.live/QrkD.

For more info on what you can do in patterns, see the [pattern features
docs](docs/pattern-features.md).

## Installation

On macOS, binaries are available via [Homebrew](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/semgrep):

```bash

> $ brew install returntocorp/semgrep/semgrep

Reviewer: pet peeve but I'd suggest removing this $ and the one blow, if you know what brew is you don't need a $ reminder and it is always annoying to not be able to triple-click and paste

Author: Sure, happy to do that! To me, the `$` is a nice signal that you're at a terminal vs its a code snippet, but agreed re: it makes it annoying to copy/paste. And if you're reading about Semgrep, you're probably comfortable with the terminal.

[![r2c Community Slack](https://img.shields.io/badge/r2c_slack-join-brightgreen?style=flat&logo=slack&labelColor=4A154B)](https://join.slack.com/t/r2c-community/shared_invite/enQtNjU0NDYzMjAwODY4LWE3NTg1MGNhYTAwMzk5ZGRhMjQ2MzVhNGJiZjI1ZWQ0NjQ2YWI4ZGY3OGViMGJjNzA4ODQ3MjEzOWExNjZlNTA)
[![r2c Twitter](https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/r2cdev?label=Follow%20r2cdev&style=social&color=blue)](https://twitter.com/intent/follow?screen_name=r2cdev)

> <p align="center">

Reviewer 3: Can we sneak that awesome new logo from @dan5382 somewhere in here?

Author: :+1: will do.

  <a href="#overview">Overview</a>
  <span> · </span>
  <a href="#installation">Installation</a>
  <span> · </span>
  <a href="#usage">Usage</a>
  <br/>
  <a href="#resources">Resources</a>
  <span> · </span>
  <a href="#contributing">Contributing</a>
  <span> · </span>
  <a href="#commercial-support">Commercial Support</a>
</p>

<h3 align="center">
  A fast, lightweight static analysis tool that lets you search code like you’d write it.
</h3>  
<h3 align="center">
  Find security bugs. Enforce coding standards. Scan every PR.
</h3>
<h3 align="center">  
  Easily block bad code so you can get back to building the next great thing.

> </h3>

Reviewer 4: IMO the styling and hierarchy of these three `<h3>`s make them seem like competing descriptions and/or taglines. I’d suggest either moving one to a top-level (above the badges, for example), or moving all three to a bullet list like:

With Semgrep, you can:

* search code like you’d write it
* find security bugs
* enforce coding standards
* scan every PR or build
* Easily block bad code so you can get back to building the next great thing.

Reviewer 2: I had a similar reaction. Would you support me pulling the Bento README styling here, using the Semgrep logo, tagline, and your hierarchy changes?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/605906/84199130-7b8ef880-aa59-11ea-915e-5a022e8cddc8.png)

What I like about how we laid out our other README is that navigation elements came before badges and other secondary information.

Concretely, I think I would use a tagline like:

> Fast and customizable static analysis for many languages. Find code matches the way you'd write them.

I'm trying to find a succinct way of emphasizing speed and simplicity. My suggestion needs work :)

Semgrep is a tool for easily detecting and preventing bugs and anti-patterns
in your codebase. It combines the convenience and rapid iteration speed of
`grep`, but is "code-aware"; that is, you can easily match function calls, class
or method definitions, and more.

> 

Reviewer 2: @pabloest @clintgibler Is there a good gif we can add here? Perhaps of the CLI -> pack running workflow? I can help define / test it.

Author: I don't have this gif currently. I propose creating a separate issue to track this so we can push out the updated readme faster. @dlukeomalley

## Quickstart

> After [installing semgrep](#installation), run the default set of checks with:

Reviewer 4: On semgrep.live we’ve described these as rules, not checks (AFAICT). Not sure if that was a deliberate decision or not. cc @dlukeomalley

Reviewer 2: We should standardize, though I'm sufficiently confused about both terms that I don't have a preference. We use them both interchangeably in our conversations.

Author: I've changed this to "rule". We do use them interchangeabley various places and we should decide on one.

Reviewer 4: Let’s use “rule.” Any objections?

> After [installing semgrep](#installation), run the default set of checks with:

Reviewer 2: From a flow perspective, I find myself jumping to installation, then jumping back. Could we include installation instructions in the quick start or lead with the `Installation` section if it's sufficiently short?

Reviewer 3: I agree here, it's kinda awkward to immediately jump to installation then need to come back.

Author: @dlukeomalley @mschwager Personally I'd rather cut the "Quickstart" section entirely and just have everything be centralized in the "Installation" section, which users can quickly go to via the link at the top if they want.

Are you OK cutting this section?

Reviewer 2: I'm fine moving Installation to the top of the document and/or combining these sections. I do think it's important to tell you front-and-center how to get it / how to start running it.

> After [installing semgrep](#installation), run the default set of checks with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After [installing semgrep](#installation), run it using a package of pre-built [Registry](https://semgrep.live/r) rules:
```

```bash

> semgrep --config=r2c path/to/repo

Reviewer 2: I hear @ievans' feedback, though would include the `$`. It clearly denotes the context for a user (a console) and is needed for markdown's syntax highlighting, sadly.

Reviewer 3: I agree. I know this has been a minor point of contention, but I generally like to include the `$`. I get a lot of mileage out of [DigitalOcean's Technical Writing Guidelines](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/digitalocean-s-technical-writing-guidelines), especially the [Code Blocks](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/digitalocean-s-technical-writing-guidelines#code-blocks) section here. We obviously don't have their full markup system, but the end result is they use `$` or `#` for command line blocks.

Author: 3 (@clintgibler @dlukeomalley @mschwager) vs 1 (@ievans), let's go with `$` for now.

```

Or try Semgrep in your browser: [https://semgrep.live](https://semgrep.live/).

> ## Overview

Reviewer 2: @pabloest @clintgibler Thoughts on adding "Motivations" explaining our paved road approach and philosophy with keeping Semgrep simple, fast, and intended for guardrail enforcement?

Author: @dlukeomalley I like that idea but I want to think more about how we want to word that. Propose creating a separate issue to track.

Reviewer 2: I think this could start by being the tl;dr meetup slide. V0 is that acceptable?

> ### Key features

Reviewer 4: I love this section.

Reviewer 2: Ditto. Questions:

1. Can we compress it from 7 items to 5? We're just at the edge of the lower bound of [Miller's Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Magical_Number_Seven,_Plus_or_Minus_Two)?
2. May we consistently prefix each point with a succinct phrase. Item 6 is missing a prefix?

Author: @dlukeomalley It would be nice to compress to 5 but I don't know if there are any of these I'd cut, and unclear how they could be combined. Suggestions welcomed.

* **Language aware**: Semgrep parses source code into Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs), so it understands function calls, method and class definitions, conditionals, and more. 

>   * Unlike regexes, Semgrep won't get tripped up matching things you don't care about in comments or string literals.

Reviewer 2: To match convention elsewhere, can we eliminate this bullet or break it out in a follow-up section? I suspect this specific feature is one worth demonstrating or spending some time on later in the README.

* **Fast**: Speedy enough to run on every build, commit, or file save.

> * **Batteries included**: Leverage hundreds of preexisting security checks for popular languages and frameworks in the community [registry](https://semgrep.live/r), including coverage for the [OWASP Top 10](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* **Batteries included**: Leverage hundreds of pre-built rules for popular languages and frameworks in the community [registry](https://semgrep.live/r), including coverage for the [OWASP Top 10](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/).
```

(matching with what’s going to go live on the semgrep.live page)

* **Handles multiple languages**: No need to learn and maintain multiple tools for your polyglot environment (e.g. ESLint, find-sec-bugs, rubocop, gosec, ...).
* **Easy to tweak**: Rules look like the code you’re searching, no static analysis PhD required.

> * Does **not** require compilation, Semgrep runs on source code directly. 

Reviewer 4: Perhaps another way to phrase this that better matches the pattern of the other bullets:

* **Runs on source code**: Semgrep doesn’t require compilation because it runs on source directly.

Reviewer 2: This is a big deal for Java. Thoughts on calling it out specifically?

Author: @dlukeomalley Agreed that this is a big deal, not sure how to call it out specifically, beyond "unlike `tool names`". Thoughts?

* **Easy to integrate**: Highly portable and many CI and git hook integrations already exist. Run via CLI or Docker, output `--json` and pipe results into whatever system you want.

### Language support

> | **Python** | **Javascript** | **Go &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;** | **Java &nbsp;** | **C &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;** | **Ruby** | **Typescript** | **PHP &nbsp; &nbsp;** |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| **Python** | **JavaScript** | **Go &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;** | **Java &nbsp;** | **C &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;** | **Ruby** | **TypeScript** | **PHP &nbsp; &nbsp;** |
```

|:-----------|:---------------|:----------------------------|:----------------|:----------------------------------|:---------|:---------------|:----------------------|
| ✅          | ✅              | ✅                           | ✅               | ✅                                 | 🚧 |  Coming...      | Coming...             |

> ... and many more coming.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Missing support for a language? Let us know by filing a ticket or emailing [support@r2c.dev](url).
```

Thoughts on inviting a reachout? Perhaps via a ticket, email, or Slack?

### Pattern Syntax Teaser

> One of the most unique and useful things about Semgrep is how easy it is to write and iterate on queries. 

Reviewer 2: I think we could strike this section so long as we have motivation / overview above.

Author: @dlukeomalley To me, I feel like this more clearly outlines the value of semgrep's expressive power than having just the example pattern table, which, in its current form, the value prop doesn't leap out to me.

I'd be up for reordering or renaming this section if you think that makes more sense, or can cut it if you'd prefer.

The goal is to make it as *easy as possible* to go from an idea in your head to finding the code patterns you intend to.

> **Example**: Let's say you want to find all calls to a function named `exec`, and you don't care about the arguments. With Semgrep, you could simply supply the pattern `exec(...)` and you'd match:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Example**: Say you want to find all calls to a function named `exec`, and you don't care about the arguments. With Semgrep, you could simply supply the pattern `exec(...)` and you'd match:
```

I avoid using the first person plural in documentation / instructions as it can get fairly messy.

> **Example**: Let's say you want to find all calls to a function named `exec`, and you don't care about the arguments. With Semgrep, you could simply supply the pattern `exec(...)` and you'd match:

Reviewer 2: Few thoughts for this section:

1. I think it's worthwhile for us to acknowledge this is a Python sample
2. I'd like to add or use the term "audit" for the broader queries. I have been using them when I want to see all call sites in my code, and perhaps explaining that workflow a little will help inspire folks.

~~~python

> # Simple cases grep could find

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Simple cases grep finds
```

exec("ls")
exec(some_var)

# But you don't have to worry about whitespace
exec (foo)

# Or calls across multiple lines
exec (
    bar
)
~~~

Importantly, Semgrep would *not* match the following:

~~~python
# grep would match this, but semgrep ignores it because 
# it doesn't have the right function name
other_exec(bar)

# semgrep ignores commented out lines
# exec(foo)

# and hard-coded strings
print("exec(bar)")
~~~

> Semgrep can even do fancy things like matching aliased imports:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Semgrep will even match aliased imports:
```

~~~python
# Semgrep knows that safe_function refers to exec so it
# will still match!
#   Oof, try finding this with grep
import exec as safe_function
safe_function(tricksy)
~~~

> Play with this example in your browser here: https://semgrep.live/QrkD.

Reviewer 4: NICE!

Reviewer 2: I'd love to include a "run this locally" snippet for people: `semgrep -l javascript -e "exec(...)" code`

| [`$ELEMENT.innerHTML`](https://semgrep.live/9ze)                   | ``el.innerHTML = "<img src='x' onerror='alert(`XSS`)'>";`` |
| [`$TOKEN.SignedString([]byte("..."))`](https://semgrep.live/rXW)   | `ss, err := token.SignedString([]byte("HARDCODED KEY"))`   |

> → [see more example patterns in the live registry viewer](https://semgrep.live/registry).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
→ [see more example patterns in the Semgrep registry](https://semgrep.live/registry).
```

./semgrep-v0.9.0-ubuntu-generic.sh
```

To try Semgrep without installation, you can also run it via [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/):

```
docker run --rm -v "${PWD}:/home/repo" returntocorp/semgrep --help
```

> ## Terminology

Reviewer 2: Meta comment. By this point in the README it's feeling very dense. I'd love to do a design pass to see if we can make it feel lighter or cut more content.

Author: Agreed re: making it light and doing a later design pass.

> A **rule** (or *check*) is a Semgrep pattern that can be used to tell match

Reviewer 4: Aha, see the earlier comment about rules vs checks. I don’t have a strong preference either way except that we remain consistent.

Reviewer 4: “tell match source code” seems a bit clunky.

source code.

A **rule pack** (*check pack*) is a collection of Semgrep rules bundled
together. For example, "Here are a bunch of Java checks I want to run."

> ## Usage

Reviewer 2: These may be more "Workflow" related. Thoughts on adapting this section be about workflows and use cases, and added a "Usage" section that is more focused on the CLI? See Bento:

* https://github.com/returntocorp/bento#usage
* https://github.com/returntocorp/bento#workflows

Reviewer 2: Given the length of the README I could see some of these workflow items being sub-pages and getting some breathing space.

Generally when you're using Semgrep you're going to be doing one of three things:

1. Manually scanning your source code using existing rules.

> 1. Running Semgrep in CI so every pull request (PR) is checked.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Running Semgrep in CI so every pull request (PR) is scanned.
```
?

1. Writing new rules.

The following sections cover each in more detail.

### 🔍 1. Run Existing Rules

> The easiest way to get started with Semgrep (other than [semgrep.live](https://semgrep.live/)) is to scan your code with an existing set of rules.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The easiest way to get started with Semgrep (other than [semgrep.live](https://semgrep.live/)) is to scan your code with pre-built rules.
```

The [Semgrep rule registry](https://semgrep.live/r) contains rules for many programming errors, including security issues and correctness bugs. Security rules are annotated with CWE and OWASP metadata when applicable. OWASP rule coverage per language is displayed below.

<p align="center">

>     <img width="600" src="https://web-assets.r2c.dev/semgrep-rules-owasp-coverage-20200520.png" style="max-width:100%;" />

Reviewer 4: Can this image be a bit larger? It’s slightly hard to read the text.

</p>

> You can use an existing [Check Packs](https://semgrep.live/packs), that contain sets of rules grouped by language and/or framework:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can use pre-built [Rule Packs](https://semgrep.live/packs) that contain sets of rules grouped by language and/or framework:
```

```bash
semgrep --config=https://semgrep.live/c/p/java
semgrep --config=https://semgrep.live/c/p/python
semgrep --config=https://semgrep.live/c/p/golang
semgrep --config=https://semgrep.live/c/p/javascript
...
```

> Or you can run all of our default rules for all languages as appropriate (note: each rule says what language it's for, so Semgrep won't try to run a Python rule on Java code).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Or you can run all of Semgrep’s default rules for all languages as appropriate (note: each rule says what language it's for, so Semgrep won't try to run a Python rule on Java code).
```

Currently, the easiest way to integrate Semgrep into CI is via a GitHub action we've built. See the [integrations docs](docs/integrations.md) for more details.

Semgrep can also output results in the standardized Static Analysis Results Interchange Format ([SARIF](https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0/cs01/sarif-v2.1.0-cs01.html)) with the `--sarif` flag, if you use tools that accept this format. 

### ✍️ 3. Writing Rules

One of the strengths of Semgrep is how easy it is to write rules.

This makes it possible to:
* Quickly port rules from other tools.
* Think of an interesting code pattern, and then find instances of it in your
    code.
* Find code base or org-specific bugs and antipatterns - things that built-in
    checks for existing tools won't find because they're unique to you.
* and more!

#### Simple Rules

For iterating on simple patterns, you can use the `--lang` and `--pattern`
flags.

```bash
semgrep --lang javascript --pattern 'eval(...)' path/to/file.js
```

The `--lang` flag tells Semgrep which language you're targeting and `--pattern` is the code pattern to search for.

#### Advanced Rules

> Some rules need more than one line of pattern to express.Sometimes you want to express code patterns, like: `X` must be true AND `Y` must be too, or `X` but NOT `Y`, or `X` must occur inside a block of code that `Y` matches.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some rules need more than one line of pattern to express. Sometimes you want to express code patterns, like: `X` must be true AND `Y` must be too, or `X` but NOT `Y`, or `X` must occur inside a block of code that `Y` matches.
```

For these cases, Semgrep has a more powerful and flexible [YAML syntax](docs/configuration-files.md).

You can run a single rule or directory of rules specified in YAML by:
```bash
semgrep --config my_rule.yml path/to/dir_or_file

semgrep --config yaml_dir/ path/to/dir_or_file
```

**Example Advanced Rule**

> Let's say we are building a financial trading application in which every `Transaction` object must first be passed to `verify_transaction()` before being passed to `make_transaction()`, or it's a business logic bug.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Say you are building a financial trading application in which every `Transaction` object must first be passed to `verify_transaction()` before being passed to `make_transaction()`, or it's a business logic bug.
```

> We can express this behavior with the following Semgrep YAML pattern:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can express this behavior with the following Semgrep YAML pattern:
```
